Electrons and Atoms - Sam Altman

Electrons and Atoms - Sam Altman

A friend recently asked me for my list of current breakout
companies.  I made it, and noticed that
all of them had only one thing in common. 
I then went back through the last three YC batches and looked at our
top-ranked companies (although we get it wrong plenty of times, it’s reasonably
predictive).  These companies had the
same trait. 

This shared trait is a connection between the online and the
physical worlds.  There are two main
models for this—the Uber model, where you push a button on a website/app and
something happens in the real world, and the Airbnb model, where you use a
service to do something in the real world that would be possible but extremely
inefficient.  In both cases, the key
thing is enabling users to do things they do in real life much more easily—yes,
you could have called a cab company, but it took a long time, the cab didn’t
always come, you didn’t know when it was near, you had to have cash or get a
nasty look from the cabbie, etc.

Even Facebook is a lightweight version of this—with
Facebook, you bring your real world online so you can interface with it more
often, more easily, and from anywhere. 
Facebook has obviously been much more successful than services like
SecondLife, which were entirely virtual, and services MySpace, which were less
about real identity and real friends. 
Amazon was perhaps the original example of bridging these two worlds.

As a corollary, new companies that exist only in the real or
online world do not seem to do as well as companies that connect them.  This happens more often on the online side
than the physical side, both because we generally don’t think of things like
barbershops as startups and because most people don’t expect pure hardware
companies without a strong Internet component to do very well.  And this bridge is often a matter of
degree—many, if not most, online companies touch the real world in some
way.  But the ones that do it the most
seem to be doing better.

In many ways, this is a version of Marc Andreessen’s “software
is eating the world”.  To eat the world,
you have to operate in the world.  I
think two big reasons it’s happening so much now are 1) smartphones are in
everyone’s hands and 2) there is a level of personal comfort with putting real
life on the internet that seems to have tipped about two years ago.

There are probably a lot of areas where this doesn’t
apply—enterprise software and developer tools, for instance—and there are clear
counterexamples like Google.  But as a general rule, it seems to be worth considering when
thinking about new businesses.   

Sam Altman

Subscribe by Email

You're following this blog.

Unfollow

Follow this Posthaven

Enter your email address to get email alerts about new posts on this site.
Unsubscribe anytime.

Email address is invalid.

Follow @sama

      Posted