The separation of advice and money - Sam Altman

The separation of advice and money - Sam Altman

One of the most interesting changes in venture capital going
on right now is the separation of advice and money.  For a very long time, these have been a
package deal.

Great advice is really important; some founders don’t
appreciate this initially (I was guilty of it) but always learn to.  But great advice does not have to come from
venture capitalists; it often comes from people like former founders.

There have been a few small indications of the advice/money
separation over the past few years, but crowdfunding is now really making it
happen.  Some companies can raise money
on very good terms from investors that don’t know much about startups, and then
give equity to the advisors they want to work with.

There are probably going to be big advantages and big
disadvantages to this.  On the positive
side, founders may end up with less total dilution and get to choose whatever
advisors they want—not just the people that happen to manage institutional
money.  Another big positive is that more
competition (and more transparency) makes investors behave better.  On the negative side, advisors probably won’t
work quite as hard for a company that they don’t have a lot of capital invested
in.  Also in the negative column, this
will probably further worsen founders’ disrespect for capital.  And perhaps worst of all, I expect a lot of
people to lose a lot of money—startup investing is both hard and appeals to
gambler’s instincts, and it’s easy to imagine it becoming the new daytrading.  At some point, of course, the pendulum will
swing back.

Advisors will probably still put in some capital, but
probably at a better effective price than people who just invest.  The hard part is that everyone thinks they
are a great advisor and wants the special treatment.

The bigger force at work is the long-term trend towards
founders having more leverage than investors. 
This change in leverage has happened for a lot of reasons, but
specifically, crowdfunding probably would not have been possible if companies
needed as much capital to start as they did ten years ago.  Also, startups are cool now, so more people
want to invest.

Quick and painless fundraising, without advice necessarily being
part of the package, is what many founders want.  In a sense, VCs sell advice, but founders
want to buy money.

Crowdfuding is an answer to this (also, the crowd is willing
to fund things VCs are not, pay higher prices and on very clear terms, etc.)  Fundraising has not been an efficient
market—VCs and angels have been able to corner it with laws, access, and it
being the only source of advice.  But the
Internet continues its never-ending march.

The best VCs are great, and they will probably continue to
do well.  In fact, they’re so good that
they could probably get away with only selling advice—they understand how to
build big companies in a way that few other people in the world do.  They may have to adapt their strategy
somewhat—for example, in response to being able to buy less ownership in
earlier rounds, I suspect some firms will shift to writing much larger checks
to the obvious winners in later rounds.

The mediocre and bad VCs will have to adapt or die. 

Sam Altman

Subscribe by Email

You're following this blog.

Unfollow

Follow this Posthaven

Enter your email address to get email alerts about new posts on this site.
Unsubscribe anytime.

Email address is invalid.

Follow @sama

      Posted