What to do if a bubble is starting - Sam Altman

What to do if a bubble is starting - Sam Altman

Maybe now we’re actually in the early stages of a startup
bubble.  Valuations are trending up
again.  And no one is talking about a
bubble anymore, so it could be happening. 

Many companies still feel reasonably priced.  Yes, Facebook is up 70% in the last six
months, but I think it’s likely still undervalued.  Lots of companies raising B rounds are doing
it with large profits and at reasonable multiples.

But the very early stage feels somewhat out of whack.  Companies raising money at $15MM+ plus valuations
with no traction and no real vision beyond starting a startup still strikes me
as unsustainable (not to mention bad for the companies).

Lots of other signs point to a bubble—founders of Series A
stage companies being angel investors, a significant uptick in the number of
parties, soaring rents, soaring salaries,
lots of new investors coming to valley, and MBAs starting companies as the fashionable
thing to do again.

Even if this is the beginning of a bubble, it will likely go
on for awhile longer—at least as long as the Fed keeps the stimulus going, and likely
longer.  Maybe it goes on for another
couple of years.

We can debate whether or not companies are overpriced, but
it is an absolute certainty that at the first sign of real trouble, most
investors will overreact and invest much less precisely at the time they should
be investing more.

So the question is, if you believe that this may be the
beginning of a bubble, what should you do now?

Fortunately, the answers are things you should be doing
anyway.

First, you should not be too afraid.  The only thing that is cheap during a startup
bubble is capital.  Everything else is
relatively more expensive.  If you’re a
real company, a downturn that you’re prepared for can be beneficial.  Good companies can make incredible strides
during a bust.

Make sure you have enough money in the bank, and treat this
money as the last money you’ll ever raise—at the very least, have a plan B to
get to profitability without raising any additional capital.  If you need to raise more, this is a good
time to do it.

Focus on a path to profitability.  Remember that, if your customers are mostly
startups, revenue can dry up fast.

Resist the urge to ramp up to a crazy burn rate.  Be especially fearful of long-term
commitments like expensive leases and people. 
Don’t hire unnecessary people. 
Stay as lean as you can.  Establish
a culture of frugality.

Bubbles bursting also require startups to focus, which is a
good thing to be doing in any case.  Cut
products and features that are not working. 
Focus relentlessly.

Of course, people are terrible at predicting bubbles and
busts, so I’m likely wrong.  Luckily, I
really do believe these are good things to do anyway.

Sam Altman

Subscribe by Email

You're following this blog.

Unfollow

Follow this Posthaven

Enter your email address to get email alerts about new posts on this site.
Unsubscribe anytime.

Email address is invalid.

Follow @sama

      Posted